Members: Rose Didcock, Samuel Nunoo, Evan Oehsen

    Project: 1B
       Product proposal: samuelnunoo/SWE-Team-Project (github.com)
       Primary author: Rose 

P1B Competitive Research
Introduction
The product space that we are in is data organization and productivity applications. This spans over a wide range of uses, from product management to structured databases. More specifically, these applications aim for productivity through data organization–categorizing and classifying data to make it more usable. 
We searched for comparable offerings through google and reddit searches of popular applications in this space and from personal experience using several of these products. This personal experience gives us more insight into the product than simply browsing the features page can provide, especially into user experience and what it is good/bad for. Out of the dozens of applications we looked at, we decided to select Notion, AirTable, ClickUp, Fibery, and RemNote for their dominance in the market and diverse set of strengths in the data organization space. We also chose products that were more familiar to us, in order to be able to draw off our experiences interacting with them. We believe that the final list of applications we chose captures our product space effectively; it both spans a variety of aspects of it with the diverse set of strengths and weaknesses each brings to the table, yet stays central to the target market with a focus on organizing thinking, learning, and planning, with powerful referencing, linking, and organization capabilities.
Terms and Definitions
Bullets: nestable, expandable and collapsible dots that can be used to present and hide sub-categorizations of a page.

Detail View: a feature present in Coda.io that allows users to drop and drag columns of a specified table on a 2D Grid during edit mode. Each dropped column presents itself as a white card where its content is a placeholder of its specified type (text, number, image etc.). A settings button is present near the right edge of the card and clicking it reveals CSS properties that pertain to that card’s column type. These settings allow users to modify the presentation of the data in the cards such as text size and image width. On the top-left side of the 2D Grid is a short by width but vertically long section that contains a search bar with a container directly below it. Upon exiting edit mode, the container fills with rectangular cells where each cell contains text data from a corresponding row of a specified table column. Clicking a cell presents all of the data of a selected row in the 2D Grid with the CSS properties and grid arrangements specified in edit mode.

Bi-Directional Links: A feature that is present on a page that visually presents links to all pages that have a reference to the current page.

Cover Photo: A  feature that presents an image of choice in a medium sized rectangular box above a document which can enhance the perceived beauty of the doc.
Template Card: A user-facing feature which provides a card with presentation similar to the Detail View  that can be embedded onto a page. This card contains the columns  of a specified table type and can be appended to specific pages and inserted with a hotkey shortcut. Content entered into the card is transferred to a database as an entry to a corresponding table that the user selects. This allows data across all documents to be accessible and queryable.
Below is a brief description of each of the competitors we researched.
Notion
https://www.notion.so
Notion is a popular document organizer that provides users with databases for intuitive connections. Notion is a startup based in San Francisco, founded in 2016. When it was first released, founder Ivan Zhao intended for it to be a no-code database/application builder. However, it quickly evolved to become the all-encompassing productivity tool we see today. While Notion began as an in-browser application, it was made available for Windows, Mac OS X, Android, and iOS by 2018. In April of 2020, Notion raised at a $2 billion valuation and had 4 million users. Notion didn't begin life as an all-in-one productivity tool. In actual fact, it was much closer to Airtable and other tools in the “no code” movement. Originally, they wanted to create a way for anybody to create their own applications without writing a single line of code. The company now claims to be an all-in-one workspace for note-taking, knowledge and data management, project and task management. The software is described as a file management tool offering a unified workspace, allowing users to comment on ongoing projects, to participate in discussions and receive feedback from others. 
This software has a variety of use cases. It is used for software development, product management, student notebooks, research thesis, and the list goes on. Notion is praised for its monochromatic, minimalist UI which users have found to be easy to navigate. Additionally, Notion also provides tables which allow the user to structure data, query, sort, and filter it and change its presentation. Email Invite is another great feature and provides a mechanism present in the settings menu to invite collaborators where  on-screen indicators are visible for team members to see each other’s mouse movements. This makes collaboration convenient and easy.
Notion, while powerful, has severe limitations. Firstly, there is no ability to connect to external applications such as Google Calendar to integrate your data with. Another weakness is that adding content to tables requires you to navigate to the appropriate table page or to embed that table into the current working document. THis limits data-entry efficiency, especially when working with chunks of data that you would like to enter into many different tables. Additionally, since there aren’t any Bullets, it is inconvenient to nest information within any given page. The missing bullet functionality prevents nesting and hiding of information, and this impedes organization. Furthermore, it is not ideal to use Notion for product management since it does not provide users with a mechanism to automatically create reminders and notifications when entering dates to the date field of a table. Our research and experience with Notion has emphasized the need for more effective organization. To address these issues, implementing information nesting with the use of Bullets and implementing Template Cards with data and bi-directional links linked to a central database. A lack of notifications, through phone or email would be a simple feature to add that would greatly improve time management.
ClickUp
https://clickup.com
ClickUp is a popular task management software with support for rich text documentation and databases. ClickUp was founded in 2017 and moved out of beta the same year. By 2019, version 2.0 was released, introducing docs, chats, dashboard, and automation to what was formerly a much more general project management tool. At this point, Notion had grown enough to cut the ribbon on two new locations in San Diego and San Francisco. The company raised Series A and Series B funding both in 2020, at $35 million and $100 million respectively. 
ClickUp offers a customizable workplace productivity platform that serves all departments across an organization. Their plan gives people access to task management software, docs and wikis, chat, and integrations with a host of other popular tools. In our prior experience, we used ClickUp for tasks. It is a good application for tasks as the software provides a way to structure and attribute your data  which allows you to categorize, date, add reminders, etc. to a list of tasks. Because of their high structured and attributed data, it has some use as a knowledge base. It is an effective tool for organizing vast amounts of categorized information. Out of all the competition this software has the most features and the best return on investment (to a customer) with updates every week. Among other features, this software has alarms, allows you to integrate your data with external services such as Google Calendar, IFrame embed support, Dashboards, Analytics, Sprint and SCRUM Plugins, Document Rich-Text support, Tables, Gantt Views, Calendar View and the list goes on. These features give this application a wide user base, from students, doctors and professionals to hobbyists. People use this to manage their schedules, to manage software development and other projects, and use it as a light document wiki.
While ClickUp is a great tool for task management, it does not have the best documentation experience. Their document editor does not contain native bi-directional links and the content doesn’t support half of the document related features that notion has. This means that true Product Management features that developers need (documentation of architecture, product specifications etc) would necessitate a separate platform to use in conjunction with this tool, which is not ideal. Corroborating what we learned from Notion, our experience with ClickUp has also established the need for template cards, to improve organization by making it easier to add data to numerous tables. This also includes the implementation of bi-directional links. We also identified room for improvement aesthetically, more specifically with the implementation of cover photos and images. Finally, in terms of productivity, we envision a feature where documents that have recently been worked on are saved and displayed in a portion of the page for easy access later.
Airtable
https://airtable.com
Airtable is an extremely popular platform to store data in sheet form. Airtable was founded in 2012 in San Francisco. In February of 2015, Airtable raised $3 million, launching its API and raising another $7.6 million later in the year. It has since raised series B funding in 2018, series C funding in 2018, and series D funding in 2020, for $52 million, $100 million, and $185 million respectively. Starting as an easy-to-use online platform for creating and sharing relational databases, AirTable is a multi use technology that Samuel has used for a variety of things. 
One of AirTable’s strengths is its ability to seamlessly add different column types, from rating, number, formula, to images, there is support for all your needs. In months of usage, no user-facing bugs were noticed by Samuel. Many people use AirTable, from students, to companies and nonprofits. There is extensive support for add-ons, as well as the ability to run javascript code against your data. One of such add-ons is a page design feature which allows you to represent table data in various formats including cards, gantt view, scripting, charts, and more.  There is also extensive integration support and AirTable gives users API Access to their data which supports Webhooks. The minimalist user interface makes AirTable easy to use. It is also easy to share your database making team usage possible. 
The main downside of AirTable is the lack of a document editor. While it has powerful data organization capabilities, the platform doesn’t allow for free-flowing content. Due to this, users with a need for an integration of both structured and unstructured data would have to look elsewhere. The organization capabilities of this application limit the potential for free-flowing content, and thus call for the implementation of a document editor. In addition, the template card feature would respond to the need for structure in data organization.
Coda.io
https://coda.io/
Coda.io is a web app that strives to combine powerful tables and unstructured documents. Coda provides word-processing, spreadsheet, and database functions, blending spreadsheets, presentations, apps, and documents together. The software can integrate with third-party services like Slack and Gmail. Coda.io was founded in 2014 out of the San Francisco Bay Area. That same year, the company received $25 million in series A funding. The company received their series B funding of $35 million in 2015 and series C funding of $80 million in 2020. 
One of Coda’s main strengths is its user experience with its refreshing, minimalist design. A key feature allows the user to create a table and add different column types, similar to AirTable, but with the additional functionality of changing the appearance of a table to a gantt, kanban, or calendar. Since Coda also supports documents, you can write essays and combine structured data, making Coda popular amongst accountants and other professionals. Coda also has API support, so it is easy to query your data when you need it and connect it to external software. The DetailView of Coda has inspired our design of using Template Cards. It allows you to arrange and present table data in a beautiful almost newspaper-like way. Furthermore, this app provides Public Pages where you can display your page at a public URL. Samuel’s experience with this application involved using it to create a Wiki for all his work. 
Coda provides powerful tables, but provides limited connections of those tables between pages. More specifically, it is difficult to integrate the data from tables in one page to another page. This lack of flexibility becomes cumbersome when using the product to develop an open-source mod for a game which involves reading thousands of lines of code and dissecting what each section does. This naturally necessitated the ability to reference data from the table which Coda did not make easy. Furthermore, since everything has to be done in tables in order to get “PowerUp” benefits, editing cells is made frustrating by having to click on cells in the detail view to type text and a lack of rich text support. Furthermore, their product management features are abysmal. While you can create kanbans and gantt views, they are lacking task management capabilities such as notifications and reminders that other options like ClickUp have. This severely limits the possibility for use in comprehensive product management solutions. A dealbreaker in Samuel’s experience on the app was its inability to be used as a platform for users to update and manage the page. The main issue we identified was the lack of connections between tables, limiting the potential for referencing data, in addition to a lack of rich text support to table columns. There is again a need for centralized data, and intuitive linking, that leads us towards the idea of the embedded template cards. A lack of notifications also is notable with this product, and is a basic feature that would add significant value for task management. 
RemNote
https://www.remnote.io
RemNote is a flat-hierarchy application that provides a new way of structuring documents with strong support for Spaced-Repetition based learning. RemNote is a web and desktop application which began as a research project at MIT. A small team came out of the project to formally develop it into a useful product. The web version of RemNote has been available since 2019, while version 1.0 for desktop was released in December of 2020. 
Out of all the experience we have had with the competitor’s technologies, this tool seems to satisfy our requirements as users the best. A major strength of this application is the Bullet functionality that allows the user to create sub-pages of a topic without thinking about how it should be organized. RemNote’s amazing features are its biggest asset. One of the most prominent and unique is its Spaced Repetition System. This system allows you to easily convert markup text into flashcards by simply typing a double colon (::). For instance, you can say  2 + 2 :: 4 to create a flashcard that shows 2 +2 on the front and 4 on the back while maintaining its document form on the page. This flash card system is based on research in cognitive science and is great for undergraduates, medical students, and any field where you need to retain a lot of information. RemNote also has powerful tagging capabilities making it easy to find and sort related documents. You can type # and add tags and embed a Search Portal ™ to search for all documents with a specific Tag. Furthermore, you can reference pages by simply typing [[ and the page name, and all references will be connected with a bi-directional link (a bi-directional link is present on both the original and referenced page, directed to the other connected document). Additionally, RemNote has an API which allows users to implement plugins. All of these features make RemNote a powerful knowledge organizational tool. 
Plethora of benefits aside, RemNote is not free from weaknesses. Due to its flat hierarchy, they don’t provide structured and attributed data, and queries are limited to text and tags. You can’t search based on complex query requirements, and you can’t visualize information in gantt, calendar, and kanban views, a feature implemented by many of the competition (Notion, AirTable, ClickUp, Coda).  Product management or creating programming cookbooks (collections of tiny programs that each demonstrate a particular programming concept) are potential uses that are limited due to RemNote’s lack of notifications and reminders. Additionally, the Search Portal ™ is very cluttered, and displays breadcrumbs of the referenced documents, making it difficult to find information within them. A complicated user interface makes using this product less than seamless, and we believe that a modern and minimalistic scheme would improve the user experience. Other than that, the flat-hierarchy makes it more difficult to reference data, a feature that we prioritize and want to achieve by implementing the template card system. 
Fibery
https://fibery.io/
FIbery is a product management tool with powerful database capabilities. Fibery was founded in 2017. The company received $1 million in seed funding in 2020 and publicly launched in April of the same year. With the onset of COVID-19, the company pivoted their original go-to-market strategy of a more traditional product management tool to instead target remote work environments, as an all-in-one remote workspace for product teams. 
Our experience with Fibery extends to using it to hold extremely detailed specifications of functions, classes, and interfaces. The platform allows for the creation of templated structures,  making it easy to fill in and find information. This is done through the use of apps where each app can contain several types of data. Each type corresponds to a table where fields can be added in an editor. On pages or in tables, new instances of these types can be populated and can be visualized as a calendar, kanban, chart, and timeline. Unlike the competition, Fibery has superior knowledge organization capabilities with the capacity to hold structured and unstructured data. Furthermore, their unique Whiteboard mode allows users to add references to database entries on a whiteboard while also drawing, adding shapes, or inserting images on top of it. This allows for an amazing ability to visualize and create Unified Modeling Language (UML) diagrams for developers and engineers. Fibery is great for small to medium teams who are working on a product. They offer intuitive templates that allow users to represent tasks in a SCRUM backlog, which provides decent task and document management capabilities. Fibery natively supports bi-directional links, which allows you to freely reference ideas without worrying too much about how you structure your data. In addition to this, Fibery provides full access to their API–supposedly with no rate limiting–allowing you to connect your data with external services such as Google Calendar. This feature results in the following capabilities: customizing apps by creating, renaming and deleting Types and Fields; reading, creating, updating and deleting Entities; working with rich text documents; uploading, attaching, and downloading Files; updating other tools when changes are made using webhooks; and automating routine actions with programmable action buttons. 
The user interface of the app makes it very difficult to manage large spaces with many apps in use. After around 4-5 apps, the UI feels very cluttered and organization and productivity suffer as a result. The clunkiness of the UI is also an issue when creating new type entries as metadata that you usually don’t want to see, such as creation and modification date that are permanently fixed to the side.  Another weakness of Fibery is the weak selection of querying capabilities. When you enter the search bar, Fibery allows you to search only by name for a particular entry. In order to find what you are looking for from a particular type, you would need to traverse through all of your apps to the specific location of the table, and even then you would have to scroll through many of the options or go through a tedious menu to set up crude filters. Another weakness of FIbery is that it is a poor document editor. While there is support for documentation, it does not compare to the minimalist and monochromatic UI and extensive features present in apps such as Coda and Notion. There are neither Search Portals (as present in RemNote), nor embedded type tables or iframes. Custom dashboards support neither horizontal line breaks, nor bullets, nor grid layouts. Furthermore, given its rigid array of tables that are embedded in each app, it feels very inflexible and infeasible to use with large and complicated data sets. The lack of free collaboration or a public page makes sharing data difficult with third parties. As is true with many new and constantly changing platforms, usage of this application is known to be buggy, from difficulties in adding attributes, to using the whiteboard. The carefree and almost unprofessional messaging presented in their public broadcasts only makes this issue worse. Its strengths are limited towards focused project management for one specific project per workspace. 
To recap, the features that we thought were missing from this particular application are embedded tables, search portals, bullets, cover photos and images, conjunction AND OR and fuzzy attribute query functionality, breadcrumbs in the user interface, and custom document grid layout. 
Conclusion
Our research, analysis, and use of these platforms has identified areas where existing technology falls short, and has led us to a list of improvements we would make. Overall, the features and capabilities that we have found a need for are Notifications, Embedded Tables, Breadcrumbs, modern and minimalist design, bidirectional links cover photo images, bullets/nested information, and API support which would provide users to code to acquire their data. The two major components of what we want to achieve are involved in improving data organization, for quicker query and search capabilities and nesting of information. We also have identified more UX-related changes we would make to address product management needs, namely notifications and the implementation of a simple user interface, as well as including support for images where it does not exist already. 
Our proposal addresses issues in existing technology that we have encountered in our personal searches for productivity and organizational tools, and focuses on creating a system where search and find is simple and easy for the user, relying on the database structure and organization to accomplish this goal. We believe that our plan to nest data and utilize embedded template cards will be a considerable change that is not seen in the competitive products in this space. This solution that we are considering in our proposal addresses organizational issues we ran into, and would completely change the user experience, taking organization out of their hands and automating it. Our proposal will benefit from including the strengths of the competitive products that we had not considered until our research, as well as the pitfalls. That said, many of these aesthetic designs may be outside of the scope of what we accomplish in this class, and many of the “coolest” features would if anything come at the end of the process after high priority functionality was added, to avoid gold plating.
